It is -38 ° C inside.
I have never been anywhere so cold.
I had to isolate my camera so that the batteries continue to work,
and keep my microphone close to my body so that the wiring does not freeze and fall apart.
This is in the United States National Ice Core Laboratory (United States National Ice Cream Laboratory),
in Denver, Colorado,
and I thought it would be best to interview the scientists who work here
outside of this gigantic freezer.
We have represented about 20,000 meters of ice here
and that is probably from one of the 60 to 80 different boreholes from around the world.
The deepest we have is about 30,600 meters through the ice cap of Antarctica.
In our lab, the oldest ice cream we have is about 420,000 years old
and that is from the Vostok Ice Core, drilled in the east of Antarctica in the mid-1990s.
When a new core comes in,
we distribute it and send it to the main researchers.
This is all meteoric ice,
This means ice that has fallen from the sky.
They do not want tundra or sea ice,
because it would contaminate the meteoric ice we have.
One of the most important researchers who was carrying out an analysis
can check his system from home,
and he asked if someone was eating chips in the cafeteria
for he began to see a larger amount of sodium in his samples.
And they said, well ... indeed (!)
That is how sensitive this is.
If the main network fails, we have a natural gas-powered generator in the back,
it automatically sends electricity to the freezer building.
We are 100% backed up. On everything.
Each of these tubes contains a sample of ice from the North Pole or South Pole.
And from the deeper under the ground the core was taken, the older he is:
all those fallen snow compressed for maybe hundreds of thousands of years,
along with all the other things that have been carried away from the atmosphere.
Just about everything that is in the atmosphere
whether atmospheric gases or dust, or something similar,
eventually lands on the ice caps of Antarctica and Greenland
and will be buried and caught in the snow.
And when it is squeezed into ice, it stores that information
so that we can actually use these ice cores
to recreate how our atmospheric chemistry looked like
until about 850,000 years ago.
We can also determine the temperature on earth and how it changed with time
by studying the stable isotopes of oxygen in the water molecules.
In essence, they are looking for the ratio between ¹⁶O and ¹⁸O.
And through the use of many contemporary studies,
they can find out what the temperature was
in the area where the snow fell.
There is a wide variety of ways in which we can date these ice cores
with cores from Greenland, we can often see actual visible layers
these change from summer to winter, based on the dust concentration
yes, a bit like tree rings, we can count those seasons back
and thus get a date.
And every now and then we will encounter things like volcanic ash layers
and if sufficient material is present within an ash layer
we can use radiometric dating to stick a very specific age on that volcanic layer.
The margin of error with regard to our ages
are usually inside, you know, ± 10 years or so.
So it's pretty accurate, especially when we look at ice
that is a few hundred thousand years old.
By understanding the natural variations of climate change
we can better predict what will happen in the future
now that humanity has had a fairly significant impact
about what's going on with our planet
regarding the amount of greenhouse gases that we have discharged into the atmosphere
in the past century.
We can better understand the past
and through the use of that knowledge of the past
we can better model what will happen in the future.
Thank you to the whole team here
in the US National Ice Core Laboratory.
Look in the description for more information about them and about their work
and I think my eyelids stick together?
(You can not see it, but you have frost everywhere on your eyelashes.)
Really? (Yes!)